Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of human leg muscle subjected to different exercise regimens	
Comment[Submitted Name]	PGP Human Muscle Biopsies Study	
Experimental Design	stimulus_or_stress_design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF	mo	EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2007-06-07	
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	5	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-MEXP-740	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2011-01-23 11:18:36 Last Changed Rev: 14857	
Experimental Factor Name	exercise	organism part	
Experimental Factor Type	exercise	organism_part	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	Wang	Demuth	Parise	Varbanov	Qu	Tarnopolsky	Isfort	Stevens	Phillips	
Person First Name	Feng	Jeff	G	Alex	Angela	Mark	Robert	Paula	S	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email				varbanov.ar@pg.com	
Person Phone				1-513-627-8361	
Person Fax	
Person Address				ITC, 5299 SPRING GROVE AVENUE	
Person Affiliation	Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals	Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals	McMaster University, Department of Kinesiology	Biometrics & Statistical Sciences, Proctor & Gamble	Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals	McMaster University, Department of Pediatrics and Medicine	Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals	Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals	McMaster University, Department of Kinesiology	
Person Roles				submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	2007-06-07	
PubMed ID	17921420	
Publication DOI	17921420	
Publication Author List	Tarnopolsky, Mark; Phillips, Stuart; Parise, Gianni; Varbanov, Alex; DeMuth, James; Stevens, Paul; Qu, Angela; Wang, Feng; Isfort, Robert	
Publication Title	Gene Expression, Fiber Type, and Strength Are Similar Between Left and Right Legs in Older Adults	
Publication Status	journal_article	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	The study has been described in the following paper:  Gianni Parise, Stuart M. Phillips, Jan J. Kaczor and Mark A. Tarnopolsky (2005). Antioxidant enzyme activity is up-regulated after unilateral resistance exercise training in older adults. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, Volume 39, Issue 2, 15 July 2005, Pages 289-295     We cite the following three paragraphs from this paper: "MATERIALS AND METHODS Subjects   Twelve men (71.2 ± 6.5 y) volunteered to participate in a 12 week uni-lateral leg resistance training program (Table 1).  All subjects underwent a thorough screening process before being admitted into the study.  Subjects were first screened by telephone, and were then subject to a medical evaluation.  Consent from their family physician was required, and then all potential subjects underwent a resting electrocardiogram, and a sub-maximal graded exercise test on a bicycle ergometer witih a 12-lead ECG.  Exclusion criteria included: evidence of coronary hear disease; congestive heart failure; uncontrolled hypertension; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; diabetes mellitus; renal failure; major orthopaedic disability; and smoking.  None of the subjects had ever participated in a structured exercise program.  After subjects were advised of the benefits and risks of participation, subjects gave their written informed consent.  The study was approved by the McMaster University and Hamilton Health Sciences Research Ethics Board and conferred to the principles of the declaration of Helsinki.   Exercise Training Resistance training was performed three times weekly on non-consecutive days (Monday, Wednesday, and Friday) for 12 weeks, under strict supervision.  Prior to and after each training session subjects were required to perform passive stretching.  Resistance exercise for each session consisted of 3 sets of 10 repetitions for each of leg press and leg extension.  Training progressed from one set of each exercise at 50% of the initial 1 repetition maximum (1RM) to 3 sets at 80% of 1RM over the training period.  Training logs were kept to record the volume and intensity of each session.  The 1RM was re-evaluated every 2 weeks, and the training load was adjusted accordingly.  All exercises were performed on universal strength training equipment (Universal Gym Equipment, Inc., Cedar Rapids, Iowa).  Muscle Biopsy A muscle biopsy was taken from the vastus lateralis muscle of both legs before as well as after the training period, 20 cm proximal to the knee joint using a modified Bergström needle (5 mm diameter) with suction modification.  The biopsy specimen was dissected of fat and connective tissue and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.  All samples were stored at -80 °C for subsequent analysis.   All subjects were required to abstain from strenuous physical activity for 48 hours prior to the testing session.  The non-trained leg performed an acute bout of exercise at the same relative intensity of the training leg to allow for the determination of the effect of training and the effect of acute resistance exercise."     Additional Notes: 1) The samples of 8 out 12 were used in the gene expression study. 2) The 2 factors in this study are: 2.1) Leg - Left or Right 2.2) Training  - Baseline: samples taken on each leg before exercise - Resistance Training: one of the legs was subject to resistance training followed by acute exercise - Acute Exercise: the other leg had only the acute exercise 3) The baseline samples will be used for right versus left leg comparison to see variance between legs for human experimentation technical issues. The samples from Resistance or Acute Exercise will be compared to corresponding baseline samples to evaluate the effect of both exercise programs on gene expression. 	
Protocol Name	P-MEXP-25949	P-MEXP-25950	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat	
Protocol Type	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description	Subjects had a muscle biopsy taken from the right and left Vastus lateralis muscle, ~ 15 cm proximal to the lateral joint line, under local anesthesia (2 % lidocaine), and four hours post-absorptive.  The samples were taken in the afternoon and subjects did not do any formal physical activity for > 72 h before the procedure.  A sample (~75 mg) was immediately cut into two pieces (~ 50 mg for gene array analysis and 25 mg for RT-PCR, see below) and placed into individual RNase-free polyethylene tubes and immersed in liquid nitrogen.  Another sample was mounted in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) medium for subsequent histochemical analysis.  All samples were stored at - 86°C prior to analysis.      .  Frozen human Vastus lateralis muscle was homogenized in TRIzol (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD) using tungsten carbide beads with shaking in a mixer mill as recommended by the manufacturer (Qiagen, Life Technologies, Rockville, MD).  RNA samples were prepared according to Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) recommendations.  After the TRIzol extraction, the RNA was purified with an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Chatsworth, CA).  Reverse transcription was performed on 10 ug of total RNA with the use of SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase and a T7-(dT)24 primer followed by second strand DNA synthesis utilizing T4 DNA polymerase as recommended by the manufacturer (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD).  Contaminants were removed from the double stranded cDNA by phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol extraction and then cDNA was recovered by ethanol precipitation.  	A RNA Transcript Labeling Kit (Enzo Diagnostics, Farmingdale, NY) was used for production of biotin-labeled cRNA (complementary RNA) targets by in vitro transcription from T7 RNA polymerase promoters, all as recommended by the kit manufacturer.  The cDNA prepared from total RNA was used as a template in the presence of a mixture of unlabeled ATP, GTP, CTP and UTP and biotinylated CTP and UTP.  In vitro transcription products were purified with an RNeasy Mini Kit (Quiagen, (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD) to remove unincorporated NTPs and fragmented to approximately 35 to 200 bases by incubation at 94 oC for 35 min in fragmentation buffer containing tris-acetate, potassium acetate, and magnesium acetate.  Fragmented cRNA was stored at -20oC until the hybridization was performed.  	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	Extracted product;Amplification;	Label used;Amplification;	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software			MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF			mo	
SDRF File	E-MEXP-740.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	ncbitax		nci_meta	mo	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	mo	EFO	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/taxonomyhome.html		http://ncimeta.nci.nih.gov/indexMetaphrase.html	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	
Term Source Version									
